---
author: Dennis Washburn
work: The Tale of Genji
section: Preface
---
The art of literature only comes into being at the moment of engagement between reader and text, and since every such engagement is different, there can never be a definitive reading. Since all translators are readers first and foremost, the most considered justification I can offer (especially to myself) is a paradoxical one: I have undertaken this work precisely because there can be no such thing as a definitive translation. The very idea of somehow completely capturing in one language a text in another is a chimera, for the text possesses the reader as much as the reader/translator possesses the text. Thus, I believe it is only through multiple translations of brilliantly complex and historically influential narratives like Genji monogatari that we can "get at" a source work in another language, that the art created in the moment of reading can be made truly manifest.

Translating, then, is a deeply humbling task because it heightens our awareness of the parochial nature of all languages and forces the translator to confront issues of faithfulness, originality, and influence that can never be fully resolved. In a sense a translation is a virtual palimpsest, a writing over of one language by another that unavoidably acts as a mediating barrier to the very text it strives to make intelligible. As a mediation of something considered authentic and original, translation can be justified only if it maintains the pretense that it is accurate and sincere in its attitude toward the source work. Indeed, translation is so fundamental to cultural exchange that its contradictory nature can seem like an analytical illusion, something that is there only when one thinks about it. The common tendency to set aside the more troublesome aspects of translation as an abstract annoyance that interferes with the readerly pretense of "getting at" that authentic something of the source text explains why the ideal of translation is transparency - a style of writing that somehow makes the translator's presence undetectable so that the reader may experience the original in an unmediated way. But that experience is a trick of the mind. A translation is an extremely intrusive form of reading, but it is a form of reading all the same, one that makes explicit the fact that literary texts only come into being as art in the consciousness of readers. In a very real sense, the authentic text of a work like Genji monogatari - the "original" that any translation gestures toward - is the sum of all its readings. To put the point in a different way, the only truly original text is one that has never been read.
