---
title: HOW WE TRANSLATE
---

**Step One,** obviously, is to obtain the raws. We generally buy all our raws from Bookwalker, unless I can obtain them from someone I know. It depends on the series, but oftentimes I'll also read the volume *prior* to translating it (or at least read the chapter before I start translating it) without thinking too much about the translation so I understand the general narrative before I translate.

**Step Two** is to do background research on anything you're not sure about in Step One (which, is especially important if the series references something niche that you don't understand.) Then, **Step Three** is all about preparation and formatting. Generally, I'll setup a Drive folder for each series and create a doc for each chapter. In each chapter, I like to have three tabs: **1)** the raws, **2)** an MTL line-by-line breakdown, and **3)** the actual document I'll be translating into. *(Note that the MTL line-by-line is SOLELY for checking the translation afterwards, as because of how literal MTLs are sometimes if you over-interpret or overlocalize something you may find it easier to catch when referencing an MTL alongside its Japanese counterpart)*.

**Step Four** is the actual first rough draft. This is the **first-pass translation** and in my opinion, one of the harder parts. I leave comments in the doc with notes on ambiguous lines, tone choices, and I'll add translation notes as needed (though usually I'll just add something like TODO: tl note this later and then... hope that I actually do that later). I find it helpful to keep a glossary with stuff like names, terminology, and character notes so that we can reference those and give them to editors so we all know that we're keeping things consistent. Though I haven't had personally have had that huge of a use for a glossary, it's especially useful for people doing series with a lot of lore.

During step four, if I come across a sentence that I can't immediately think of a good t ranslation for, I'll usually spend time nitpicking the sentence until I come up with something I'm satisfied with. Though it's not great to do so, I find it hard to move on until I come up with something that I find relatively decent. Though overall, I try to stick to leaving more over-literal translations rather than really localized ones if I can't come up with a good localized one, since it's easier to fix overly-literal ones in a later editing pass. 

I do lookup words a lot (like **a lot**), and if I don't feel I understand a word fully enough I'll look up native dictionaries as well as forum posts (especially for obscure slang). If I'm having trouble parsing an especially complicated sentence, I use stuff like [ichi.moe](https://ichi.moe) to help me break it down (very helpful service btw).

Oh, and the workflow for translating itself is pretty simple. I read the whole page once, contextualize it in my mind, and then split it into logical parts based on what is happening in the narrative. I carefully read each part, analyze the part and understand the tone and intent the author was going for as well as how they wanted the reader to feel. I lookup words as needed, compare definitions on a theasarus and weigh my options along with how they may affect the sentence. Then, I interpret the section into English. This is called sense-by-sense translation, where you translate the sense of the section rather than it's literal meaning. You read the source, filter it through your knowledge base, and then output a target translation. 

**Step Five and Six** are the two main editing passes. Of course, there are often a bunch of smaller passes in between those ones, but I generally consider those as the overarching passes. The difference though is that in Step Five we edit with the source text side-by-side (along with the MTL line by line) and in Step Six we edit without. Through several iterations of editing, the process gradually shifts from ensuring acuracy to ensuring fluency and naturalness. I think the minimum amount of editing passes you should do is at least 2-3 times. Then, in step six, we generally just make sure that everything sounds completely natural. We polish proce, make sure dialogue flows, cut out any awkward literal phrasing, etc.

**Step Seven** is one final proofreading pass, just to make sure everything reads naturally. We don't have actual quality control so this is pretty much our version of quality control, hehe.

**Step Eight** we create the EPUBs, generate covers, skim the EPUB like once and then release. 